Morning.
Well, morning, Grant and team. We'll let you introduce yourselves and say any
introductory comments you want to make.
Sure.
We've got you for the full hour. I'm not sure we'll need it, but we'll
welcome our engagement this morning.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and as an office that spends a good
chunk of its day job encouraging entities to
prepare appropriately and parliamentary committees
to exercise the scrutiny function,
we're looking forward to that opportunity to test ourselves to see whether we can-
... live up to the bar that we seek to hold others to.
And while that's made in jest, it's a genuine commitment that if there are
areas of interest to get into the activities of the office
during the '24, '25 year or what our plans are for the future, then
that's the purpose of us being here today.
Joined helpfully by CFO, Aaron Croxson,
and obviously Andrew McConnell, the Deputy Auditor-General's at the table as well.
And we've got some very
interested members of staff who have been heavily
involved in the development of the strategic refresh, which is currently
with the Speaker, but the plan that comes out with that, I understand, is in the
papers today.
So I'll kick off with some brief remarks, and then we're very happy to respond to
your questions, Mr Chair. So we're looking at '24, '25.
I joined the office three days after the end of that financial year, so in some
ways I'm learning what happened in that 12 months.
But I thought I'd speak about some performance highlights and some opportunities
for us to improve the levels of service that we're offering to
public entities and to Parliament, and then talk a little bit briefly
around what we've been doing in response to those performance opportunities that we
identified ourselves through the review of this year's performance.
So if you think of our work in two categories, first of all, our
strategic audit por- sorry, our statutory audit portfolio.
We've had some challenges in preceding years around timelines of
that service delivery. I'm pleased to report that the
continuation post-COVID with catching up with that tail of
audits has progressed pretty well.
Schools remains our dominant feature of the
portfolio by number. Roughly two-thirds of the 3,400
entities we audit are schools,
and it's particularly the smaller schools.
We did make progress in the financial year you're looking at primarily
because we were able to broaden the base of private sector providers who were
prepared to undertake school audits on our behalf.
So there's a greater pool of providers.
The team have worked really hard, and in terms of identifying
those practitioners, supporting them to make sure the work's done to quality.
And also the Ministry of Education were able to shake the tin and
identify some funding to make those school audits more
appealing to those private providers.
So timeliness has improved, but we've still got work to do, particularly
at that smaller end of schools, and we're working hard with the Ministry of
Education and the Ministry for Regulation to look
at the current reporting requirements for schools and to
challenge whether or not a gap-compliant set of financial statements
is still the right mechanism to discharge accountability back to
communities for those small schools.
We're obviously an interested party, but that's a policy question for the ministry
folks. But if there's any support we can provide in terms of better
understanding the impact on the audit workload and the
availability of suitably qualified practitioners, then we'll be
ready to provide that input.
Quality of our audit, our target is to get 100% of
audits at a level of satisfactory. We hit 90%.
I'm not uncomfortable with 90%, largely because I know that as a
result of our QA reviews, there were no audit reports that were
issued under our mandate that were found to be improper.
And so while there are improvements on those files around documentation, we would
like to see the right audit report was issued so the
assurance given to the community was the right assurance.
But as an audit office, I think 100% is absolutely the
appropriate target for us to have around audit quality.
If I jump to the discretionary work program, which is our performance audits and
inquiries, again, timeliness is not such an
issue there. But we have used timeliness, particularly in
relation to performance audits, to challenge the team to think
about,
typically these things take 10 months in lifecycle.
We've been able to shorten that for a
number of shorter, more focused performance audits to get it down to three
where it's appropriate. The trade-off is obviously breadth of scope,
but actually, if you can spend a bit more time at planning and get the
real audit question nailed, then you can actually start delivering those
performance audits in a quicker cycle time, and that will be a feature of,
we will still do longer pieces of work where it makes sense, but actually,
where we can, I think, it's an opportunity for us to deliver our product
in a more timely manner and have a greater impact for agencies
to make change. Can I get some water, Sir Ian?
Sure.
More quickly.
Also, our international peer reviews continue
to tell us that both the performance audit and the inquiries
functions are operating at a very high level of quality.
So the baked-in QA processes around those natural justice and the
like, making sure everything we say in those reports is
supported with evidence, continues to tell us we're doing the appropriate
level of work to make sure
we've got our facts straight.
So-In terms of the...
I'm not sure if the committee's interested in the finances, but I'm a chartered
accountant, have been for a very long time.
So,
if I look backwards, we've had a history of
underspends.
Largely that underspend is a result of us not being able to deliver
our ISSP, Information System Strategic Plan, in
the time that was envisaged at the time the funding was made available.
We're catching up.
And the underspend relates to the timing of the licenses being turned
on. So, the delays meant those licenses haven't yet been switched on,
but Aaron and the team assure me they will still be switched on, and we've been
able to transfer that funding forward through the budget process.
But
the reason the ISSP
is so significant to the office is our ambition around use of data
and analytics and AI. So until we've got those key
platforms operational, it's
not yet, but if it continued, delays will compromise our ability to
deliver on strategic intentions.
So it will not be acceptable. We just have to deliver
that stuff. So if I'm back in a year and we still are underspending as a
result of that, then I haven't been effective.
Very briefly, Mr. Chair, in terms of...
We still think we've got ways to go in terms of the quality of
our service to public entities. So if I look at
satisfaction with our service and the statutory audit function, it has improved
over the last five years, roughly from 71% to 77%,
at a level of satisfactory. But beneath that, I can still
see a delta between the performance of our private sector providers and our
own in-house providers.
And there's some very clear expectations around
what a rich audit relationship looks like,
working with our internal team to squash that delta.
There's no reason our people can't perform at the same level.
It's a mindset change.
So that is being worked hard on, and
that gap between us and our private sector providers,
I would like to see closed, if not
eliminated.
Strategic intentions will be tabled in the house tomorrow, so that's looking
forward out to '31, I think.
And that strategic intention's refreshed.
I think I've spoken to the committee previously about the four
priorities: modernization of our own in-house audit practice,
more transparency around how we steward the public audit system,
a sharper focus on value for money, and a more direct
thought given to how our performance audits and inquiries are going to provoke
improvements in public sector entity performance.
So not just things that are interesting to the office, but
actually how will we use that
discretionary work program to provoke change in the performance
of the entities we're engaged with.
So
those four priorities
have driven the work program. The other shift
in the way in which the program is being developed is a far more
intensive set of engagements with our central agency colleagues.
So to try and get, as far as is
practicable,
a shared view of risks across the systems and
within agencies. So,
that's been an incredibly useful lens that those central
agencies have helped us. We've got our own views,
particularly when it comes to the risks presented by the central agencies
themselves. And so we have some
slight differences of view about some of those.
But
we're continuing to work on being more connected with the central
agencies and sharing intelligence, I think puts us all in a
better position to do the job that we need to do to
help provoke change across the public service.
One key change from tomorrow, and I think the
draft work program that's in your pack, Ben, I think it's the
first document that's left our organization with our new name on it.
Unsurprisingly, from tomorrow we will
be called the Audit Office. That's what I've always called us.
But
that will be our official name,
and it will...
So the Office of the Auditor General and Audit New Zealand, which have been the two
standalone, very independent business units, have
been collapsed into one organization.
And we've done that because I genuinely
believe we can bring greater value and insight to public
entities into Parliament if we just work better across those
organizational boundaries.
And just because it's a scrutiny hearing, we have spent a sum total of
$39,400 on the brand,
the font, the color palette. And it was money that was already in the
budget to refresh those things without moving the brand.
So from a, are we getting value for the spend,
I'm pretty confident we are, but equally, I'm open to being scrutinized about
whether that's an appropriate use of...
And the structural change that's brought about that joining of the
organizations, there's been 13 people leave the organization.
We celebrated the retirement of someone who'd been with the office 47
years
last week.
And so some of the change is significantly impacting
individuals, but it's 13 people out of a staffing complement of
about 500.
And
to date, the level of enthusiasm and excitement
will-That was expressed through the consultation
process and observable in the office today.
I'm more convinced now that it was the right thing to do than when we
embarked on it. But with that, Mr. Chair, I invite your
questions.
Thank you, Grant, for that. Has your title changed?
Or is that-
Grant's fine, yeah.
That's great. All right, we're going to kick off with Dr. Deborah Russell.
Thank you, and thank you Grant and the team.
Sometimes this is one of our most important scrutiny briefings because it's the
quis custodiet ipsos custodes, isn't it? Who guards the guardians.
So-
Latin, yes.
It is Latin.
Right.
It's-
Okay
... so,
thank you for
that dissection of the 39,000 whatever.
I don't think-
400.
Oh, sorry. 39,400.
Yeah.
That's-
Get it right. Get it right. Mm-hmm
... just being up about that. Look, I was at, along with
the ACPAC conference last week, so
Public Accounts Committee and Auditors General.
Yep.
I'm sorry you weren't able to make it.
There was some interesting research from Deakin University, which has been repeated
over a number of years, which looks at the independence-
Independence, yep
... of the audit offices.
Yep.
And,
across the Australian and New Zealand jurisdictions.
Of course, I want us to be the best, and
I was disappointed to see we weren't, and one explanation for that is that our
Auditor General doesn't have
independence written into the Constitution because we don't have a written
constitution.
Constitution, no. Yep.
But I wonder if you could just talk to that report-
Sure
... a little bit, because I'm sure you've had a look at it.
And tell us what you think of your independence and how it
compares.
Yeah, and
I'm inherently quite competitive, and so- ...
being ranked fourth behind ACT, which has a staffing complement of
eight people in the audit office.
There's some key things.
And you're right, the written constitution is one which we get downgraded
for, but I think that's a very simplistic-
Mm
... way of understanding the constitutional arrangements of a nation.
But I fed that back to the Deakin researchers.
There's the follow the money powers that some Auditor Generals have,
which enables...
My mandate stops at when funding leaves the public
entity. So we can look at how well the public entity has
scrutinized the delivery of services by the private
provider or an NGO. Some of the Auditor Generals can follow the money
across that public entity boundary and into the recipient
organizations.
So that's a feature of some of the Australian state Auditor Generals
and not a feature of our legislation.
Nor is it something that I think is
fundamentally compromising our ability to do the job for Parliament
in a way that I'd be suggesting we reopen the Public Audit Act
to address those sorts of things. So that seems to be the other reason we've
downgraded. Some of the Australian jurisdictions have had their legislation
refreshed more recently than our own, which is
25 years old now.
And they get scores for more modern language in their leg,
et cetera. But there was nothing in the feedback session with the
researchers that I thought actually that that's something
that
leapt priorities in my mind.
And I say that because I think
we have a different relationship with our Parliament than I observe
my colleagues having.
The
changes that I observe through the budget rounds
does give us genuine independence, which is different in terms of the way in
which resources are provided to those Australian Auditors Generals, which is
through Treasury. And exactly the same as,
so the way in which they're resourced is the opportunity for their parliaments to
make them as effective as they choose to make them.
So, the research is really insightful.
We'll keep track of it.
But in understanding our positioning, we
haven't changed. It's the more modern legislation
in some of those jurisdictions that's got them up.
The reason we as a group are so keen to keep it live
is the value in the Pacific nations of
being a useful tool in advocating with their parliaments
to give their Auditors Generals independence.
And Fiji's, I guess, the most recent success case in that regard,
and Finiau is now enjoying a different relationship with their
parliament.
And the Cook's legislation is
pretty close to being something that
I'd be hopeful of the next 12 months we'll see that change as well.
So that's the real driver for why we commissioned the
research as part of ACPAC.
A couple of follow-ups on that, if I may. So thank you.
So at ACPAC, we put through a
change to the Constitution, which means the Pacific Parliaments are now part of
ACPAC as well, so that's quite useful in that regard too.
Before I go into specific measures though, I want you to go back to the
legislation. You said it's about 25 years old.
I think it's 2000. Yeah, 2000.
Do we need a refresh? Is it urgent, or is it something that we ought
to have a line of sight on?
We don't see any practical
impediments on a daily basis that we're confused about
mandate. We're kind of unable to access
informa- I'll give you some real feedback from-
Material
... and this is an issue that the Australians are all looking at, is
the use of legal privilege by public entities to deny
access to information when requested by the Auditor General.
And I've only been in this role for nine months, but I've worked for Auditors
Generals for over 30 years, and I've neverHad that posture
taken by a public entity when I've requested information.
Yet it's a live issue
for each of the Australian jurisdictions.
And-
Just got a sup on that, if that's all right-
Yeah. Sure
... from me.
Just very quickly.
Relating to your answer a bit earlier on the adoption of
AI as well, though. So the adoption of AI,
when it...
I think particularly 25 years is not that long in history.
But the speed of AI and the changes that AI is bringing is far bigger
than, in one year will be far bigger than what we see in 25 years.
So would that change what you think of the practical
impediment of things have to have things change in 25 years
to whether there is a necessity to change or update or
upgrade the Constitution in that way?
In my current, the way I conceive of
AI, is the opportunity it provides us to do the statutory audit
work, in particular,
differently.
And the opportunity it gives us to synthesize
massive amounts of data when we're presented with,
we want to do an inquiry, and we effectively have a legal discovery
process to sift through the information and figure out.
So those use cases,
we've tested, and there's nothing in the leg which prohibits
us from making the progress we need to make in those areas.
So,
no, but I'd be naive to... That's today's assessment.
Where this technology is tomorrow will be different.
And will we be building
AI agents who are audit staff in the future?
Probably.
The idea of having an agent as an intern is already a live thing
in the profession globally.
Yep.
And the commercial relationships we have with the firms allows us to keep
eyes on how that's developing.
But there's nothing in the legislation that would stop me being able to do
that. The European... Sorry.
Cut me off because this stuff is,
you'd hope I'd find it quite interesting.
The European jurisdictions who probably moved
quicker than anywhere else,
have effectively been stalled with GDPR,
so privacy security concerns, and the inability of the legal
fraternity, particularly in the Netherlands and the Scandinavian
nations,
to decide whether the agents that were being built
was an appropriate or inappropriate use of
citizen data.
Thank you.
Once they get through that, and I hope they do, then we'll be far clearer
about what's safe to do. And obviously, we don't have GDPR, but
we
are rightly concerned about use of client data in an
appropriate way.
Thank you. We've got another sup from Barbara Edmonds.
Yeah. It's a little bit what you were just sort of commenting on, and it's just
with the greater use of AI, obviously data sovereignty becomes a
much, having frameworks for that, particularly with
information around clients informa- You
have a huge amount of information-
Yeah
... around the ins and outs of every government agency, school-
... and different organizations.
What's the type of,
as you select the AI product or you've got a product, what's the kind of security
and confidentiality controls that you're looking at to ensure that
data, particularly because you have lots of different auditors, lots of
different people use that tool, to ensure that it doesn't become a public
information?
Yep. I'm not a
technologist, I'm just an enthusiast.
We will use the
GCDO
requirements as all public entities do in terms of
making sure we're only using technologies that have been authorized and
making sure that we're testing the environments in which we're putting them in.
At
the moment, we don't have any environments that are in
any way at risk of
breach, and we
have probably more stringent rules around the firms
who do work on our behalf. So we do require
visibility of their,
sorry, technical term, 3402 reports.
So the reports issued by the auditors of the
Azure or the other cloud provider facilities in which the files
the firms have compiled and will support the
opinions they assure on our behalf.
We have visibility of all of those reports and their quality improvement
plans should there be any deficiencies identified in the resolution
of those. So
I don't have all the answers, nor have we deployed the
technologies in a way, but we keep very close to the
security agencies and with GCDO to make sure that we're not doing
anything that is ahead of what public entities are able to do.
Right. And just think-
Sure
... the AI that we're using is Microsoft.
It's within our environment. It's as secure as we can be with the level of
security settings that we've got for our in-house
Microsoft products, and we are looking at
how we ensure and think about
particularly data that we hold as a result of our
audit simulation to model entities.
And so we've got that work underway, and that will be part of our
data governance framing in the next kind of
year to year and a half. We've made that commitment as part of our
public,
the archives audit that we had last year.
So we are thinking about it and actively making sure that we're looking after that
data.
And is that the only AI tool that you have is just the Microsoft one that's
part of-
Yeah, we don't-
Like your staff can't access-
No
... ChatGPT or whatever other-
Oh, well, I mean, everyone can access-
Yeah. Complexity
... stuff on their-
But on their work computers, et cetera.
No. And we've got policies that are very clear about that regarding staff-
Good
... how people need to interact. And in particular- ...
we're very careful about,
the products that we produce and making sure that the
kind of, methodology owner is clear about when that
tool can and can't be used.
Thank you.
Thanks. We'll jump over to Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you. Interesting discussion about the AI and, and,
uh-
Right
... um, I like your comments around agentic AI being a little bit circumspect
and then designing your own processes. So thank you for that.
My question is more around your relationship with the smaller
schools, which you've identified as a bit of a, bit of an issue.
Um, and, uh, g- this goes to your target for
value for money, um, what value are you getting from your providers?
Um, so the question really relates to what's that relationship like with
the providers that are providing that at one end, and at the other
end, what's the view of the school boards in terms of going to an audit
process? Because I've been on the receiving end as a public entity having an
audit, and you see the rela- uh, what the reaction is with staff-
Yeah
... let alone everybody else in the organization.
So
in the midst of that, is there a move more towards a stronger relational
contracting basis with your providers so that you're working together
more? Or is it still the good old-fashioned, "Here's a contract, get it done"?
No, I think, um... And Todd's not here, but I've, um,
I've been meeting with all of the providers, um,
ranging from, um, you know, Silk's one of our very large
providers based in Whanganui and across the Central North Island.
Are very attracted
to understanding, uh, they have a very strong Maori
staff complement, and I'm keen to understand how they get that, because my
experience having tried to recruit Maori commerce
graduates for a long time has been pretty
unsuccessful. Um,
so I've met personally with all of the people that sign audit reports
on my behalf, which was a, um, a different approach.
Um, and so hopefully creating greater connection means that they
can, um, if there are issues that I get to hear about
them and can use the, um, knowledge and experience across the office to
help resolve them more quickly rather than something sitting there as,
um, an arrears audit, which features in my annual report.
I want opportunities to stop counting things that haven't been done
and get focused on the work ahead of us.
So we are taking a more relational approach with the providers.
Um,
whether, whether GAAP compliant financial statements and an
audit, which is a specifically professionally defined term,
is, are both those policy settings, whether they are the right
things to give the type of assurance to the communities they
need to figure out whether the board is running the community school in the
appropriate way to deliver education outcomes for their children.
Um, I'm, I'm keen to understand where the ministry gets to on both of
those questions.
Yes. So flip to the other side. What's the attitude generally in the delinquent
schools in terms of their audits? Are they afraid of this process and don't
see it as an opportunity or?
No, I don't think they're afraid. You know, the often there's a service provider
between the auditor and the board.
Um, some of those service providers, you know, they're commercial organizations,
they allocate priority based on the significance of the client in
terms of revenue, and they deprioritize the,
the work done for those smaller schools.
Um, I don't have any leverage over those providers, but,
um,
you know, the, the, the ministry kind of does.
And so we're trying to figure out what prodding we can do
to, to get... I, I just want the tail resolved so we can get on with being
current and keep up to date.
Todd Stevenson.
Thanks, and thanks for you and your team being here.
Well, it's a bit of a follow-up, actually. I'm just curious.
Obviously, you've got, yeah, you've got the,
the firms that are doing audits on your behalf, and you've got your excellent audit
staff-
Yeah
... which we're obviously well supported as the select committee and others.
But how do you actually, how are you tracking?
'Cause you make a lot of recommendations and a lot of areas of improvement, both
obviously for the entities that you directly audit and
engage with, and then obviously the ones that are-
Yeah
... even are done by third parties.
Like, how are you tracking how those th- improvements are done?
Is it just annually, or in some cases are you having to follow up more
constantly? And then what... So it's two parts. So there's that.
Yeah.
And then if you identify an issue that just keeps occurring, occurring and
occurring, how are you dealing with that?
So, so on the first one, we are, uh, developing, as we speak here,
a recommendation tracker because as an office, I couldn't tell you,
um, across all the reports, the inquiries, the annual audit reports,
um, and the performance audits, you know, we're aware.
We do have quite a rigorous follow-up process around performance audits.
So we will revisit the entities, and we often publish,
uh, on our website, um, the results of those follow-ups.
So we'll ask the enterprise, "How are you tracking on implementing the
recommendations?" We'll do a bit of, um, inquiring to
convince ourselves that what they're saying is, is true, and we'll publish
those as a bit of a follow-up.
So that's kind of on the-
So, so just so we're clear, so you sort, you've kind of identified there's a ga-
like-
Yeah
... follow-up was being done, but you weren't systematically kind of tracking and
recording it centrally. Is that-
It, that's right.
Okay.
And so we're relying on each of the providers',
um, the standard report to management.
At the conclusion of an audit, you will identify those points raised last year-
Yeah
... that are carried forward. Um, but we at the center don't have
visibility-
Thank you
... of that aggregate picture. Um, but we are seeking to
resolve that.
Addressing that. Yeah.
Um, and, and again, it's one of the use cases of AI.
We get lots of reporting from our providers, but we're not good at
kind of bringing it all together. You know, we, we can, we can get
visibility at aggregate letter level.
Um, and Todd, sorry, your, your second bit-Was around-
Or just then when you identify, and maybe this will help you identify more systemic
issues or issues that are occurring over and over.
Well-
Yeah, how are you kind of dealing with those?
Yeah
... Well, and it's part of that relationship with the central agencies, because
if
I put it generically, we'll do a performance audit.
We will raise issues around the quality of governance, the quality
of any independent assurance that is being received by governing
bodies and supported decision-making.
We're challenging, critique the performance frameworks.
There's half a dozen to eight kind of points that feature
across every performance audit we've done for a very long time.
So trying to put that with the central agency saying, "Well,
what can we do to stop
knowing what we're going to find every time we go in and provoke a
different way of designing governance that sits over these very large,
complicated projects?" And so trying to think, is a performance audit the
right thing to do? Are we better off using that resource and developing some good
practice guidance? Are we better off actually working
jointly with the central agencies?
We know where these large things are happening in the systems.
Is there a different way of a more joined up piece of work that can
better support entities do these things properly?
So,
not an answer for you, but you're absolutely, yeah.
Just one more quick just supplementary.
Again,
obviously we talked a little bit about technology.
But yeah, is there any
jurisdictions... Obviously large amounts of data now can be collected in
real time. Is there any kind of looking at almost real-time auditing of
some entities and projects? Is that a thing that anyone's
contemplating?
Not as far as I'm aware in the Ora office, but the very last audit
I did in private practice,
apart from things you have to do at balance date, like if assets are marked to
market at balance date, you can't predict where the market's going to be, right?
Particularly at the moment.
But the audit evidence was gathered by running scripts across the
ERP all year, and so identifying
transactions that were outside of tolerance and
actually going and resolving them as and when they alert.
So that, it's not quite real time because you still have to do the stuff at
your end, but actually the foundational audit work
was done using technology alone, with some human
intervention where there was judgment.
And so there's nothing technologically that is in the way of that
being how audits are delivered.
Thanks.
If the control environments our public entities had around their own
technologies
was
in a different space than it is today.
Okay, thank you.
We're going to go Dan Bidwell, and then we'll go back to you, Deborah.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Todd really touched on my questions, but
that's really pleasing that you'll have one sort of central view on all of the
recommendations. Just in terms of,
I guess there's so many ministries and agencies that you're monitoring.
Are you able to give us an indication of who is best in class
for
taking on feedback recommendations, whether it's qualified
opinions or specific recommendations, versus at the other end,
what are some of the ministries and agencies that are
not necessarily
acting quickly on OAG advice and recommendations?
Look, if I...
Actually, we didn't qualify any central government audit reports this year.
So,
we're talking about actually most of them are reasonable.
And
there's no one agency that stands out.
There's pockets of things that are really good.
If you look at, for example, MSD does
actually use actuarial data around avoidable future cost and
making investment decisions around programs.
That's a level of sophistication that actually is not replicated
internationally very often. So I would say that
ACC do some things, not everything well
obviously, but actually if you,
as an insurer, they've had the benefit of having to think actuarially for a
very long time.
They understand their tail.
But yet the enduring return to work, et cetera, is not where
I would like it to be and probably the turnaround plan as a result
of some of those key metrics that the board are facing into. So there are pockets.
There's no one agency.
But actually, some work we're doing with central agencies at the moment,
which is around our common area of interest in strategic financial
management. I think we're getting better at pointing out who's
doing what better,
and showcasing that across the chief executive suite so they...
It's not a conceptual discussion, it's grounded on-
Mm.
Well, if you want to get better at that, go and talk-
Yeah
... to these people because they've made progress.
And
trying to find another couple of areas of common interest
where we're collectively pushing
organizations to,
if everyone revert to the mean,
it benefits the whole, right?
Mm-hmm.
Does that give you an answer, Dan?
Yeah. That's encouraging. Just going back to the AI discussion.
In the use cases that you've employed AI,
is OAG seeing that uplift in productivity?
Can we expect that in five years' time that you're able to
do equal amounts of audits at
potentially lower cost to the taxpayer?
What are the kind of indicative productivity lifts that you
are starting to see? Because I think that's the topic at the moment is-
The investment's huge, but the productivity is not there.
Look, I think personal productivity, and I'll give you two answers.
One, my own, I use it. I don't
know, I haven't measured how much time it's given me, but I seem to get through a
lot more than I used to, particularly the basic.
I'm sure you guys all use it for diary management and summarizing your
readings and all that good stuff.
The firms tell me they anticipate between 25%
and 30% of their head count being reduced.
Mm.
Some are more advanced in terms of these
technologies are going to lead to these benefits.
Others are, well, that's just what the market's talking about, so in order to
survive as a business, that's what we have to achieve.
Will it drive...
This sounds flippant, but audit fees are miraculously,
they defy gravity.
The rate of increase probably will flatten, and actually, we're already
seeing that. We've put a lid on the fee
increases that have been through the system over the last seven
years,
and we're going to drive efficiencies out of the audit work.
So the fees won't be going up.
Mm.
Not going down, but actually,
we want to see fewer hours spent, and the only way people are going to do that
is leveraging the technology they use.
Great. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you. Back to Dr. Deborah Russell.
A couple of things that are quite internal to your organization.
I noticed that you had quite a large senior leadership team,
and then you've talked about you're
reviewing that, and you've got your restructuring process.
So I'd like to hear what you're doing in that space.
Yeah.
But also, you said that you
had this restructuring going on. People are quite excited about it and staff are
positive, but there were 13 people who've left the organization.
What have you done to support those people as they've left?
Each of them have a kind of... It depends on the individual's
preferences, but access to
transition support,
some L&D investment
to allow people to make a sensible next step in their career.
So we've been very open with each of the individuals, but there's not one thing
we're doing. It's-
There are a considerable number of people-
Yeah
... but as you say, the impact on individuals-
And they're senior people.
Yeah.
And so the leadership team has reduced by
three net.
Three. Mm-hmm.
And so those people have been longstanding, very senior
members of the office,
and so we're dealing with them the level of respect that you would
hope that they receive on their way out.
We want them to
leave with high dignity, and they've delivered
great service for the organization. So those are getting very bespoke arrangements.
But we're meeting their contractual entitlements.
Very mindful that the office has a posture, and in fact, some good practice
guidance on how we expect public entities to do these
things. But,
yeah,
I haven't spoken to the individuals for a week or so,
and we've
deferred the exit for a couple to make sure the transition,
the handover's done well.
Mm.
And they're operating extraordinarily professionally.
Okay. And
so you said the restructure is bringing together Audit New Zealand and the Office
of the Auditor General.
Yeah.
Things go through phases, apart and together and apart. I agree it makes sense.
But aside from bringing the two things together, how has that restructure worked?
What's-
Well, the
two business units have been together, but actually, there were duplicated
groups.
And so the head count reduction has been in the...
We had a professional practices group inside the Auditor General and a technical
support group inside Audit New Zealand, which essentially did the same thing and
then checked each other's thing.
And so we've brought those two teams together and
that's where the 13 people have come out of the
organization, ostensibly. And the desire is to
encourage practitioners to make more judgments in the field
and less reliance on the center. And so,
there's probably further opportunity to think differently around the size of that
team. But we didn't want to
skinny it down too much with every balance dated June,
not that far away from today, and run the risk that
perhaps the practitioners are not quite ready to make all of those judgments in
the field.
So we've got six
fixed term and a couple of secondments in the team that is still
there today. So we do have some flexibility going forward
about revisiting the demands there.
Thank you. And one last annual review type question from me, and this
is very specific. So it's in the
responses to the
annual review pre-hearing questions.
Okay.
And thank you to your office for helping us to sort of write,
well, have a different approach to these this year.
Yeah. Question marks.
That really helped. It's around the average days taken to pay
an invoice from the date on which it's issued, and you've
changed that from 20 days down to 10 days.
But of course, some of your invoices are big and chunky, and
some of them are quite small. Is
this done on a head count of invoices, or is it on
the absolute number of invoices or on the dollar value of invoices?
It's done on absolute invoices.
Okay.
Excluding, obviously, invoices that we
reimburse staff
Right.
Yeah.
And I have to say that I'm far more worried about a small firm in the provinces
getting paid late than I am, say...
Well, I won't name them because then they'll tell me I'm a horrible person, but one
of the big firms.
Oh.
You know how that skews around big versus little firms at
all?
Uh.
If at all.
Yeah, I
don't. I don't have that data, but
yeah, as I said, this is absolute invoices.
Ultimately, our main costs are personnel costs.
Yeah.
Over 70% of our costs are personnel costs, so it's not like we have huge
sums in terms of
contractors and consultants, et cetera.
No, I'm genuinely worried about the small firms in the provinces who
are doing the school audits and things like that.
Well, but they would be invoicing the school.
Ah, right.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, yeah.
Yeah, of course. I hadn't thought of that.
But we do help if the small firm in the provinces is having trouble
extracting the money.
Yeah. Okay.
Provincial school.
Thank you.
I'd like to ask a few questions myself and then with time, back to you, Barb.
Firstly, in the report, the variance, you had a surplus of
1.9 million,
compared to a proposed deficit of, or forecast deficit of 6.9.
What was the significant shift there?
So it was mainly the revenue side.
Mm-hmm.
So
ultimately we
had some deferred LTPs, long-term plan audit work that swung in
that
financial year. So ultimately there's lots of swings and movements around
our
audit work, and obviously we use a memorandum account to deal with those swings.
So it's ultimately timing issues. It's never...
Yeah, it fluctuates just depending on how our auditors progress things.
Two other questions.
It's mainly the 12 LTPs.
Okay. So it's more a timing issue.
Yeah.
Just another question. In your year review, you talk about organized
crime becoming more of an issue,
and how you're sort of looking at some of the costs around ports and auditing
around that. You also talk about Operation Respect in the
New Zealand Defence Force and some of the challenges around that.
So I'd be interested in how you feel your auditing is contributing
to good political engagement in terms of perhaps shaping
policy and in the backdrop of the work we're doing on the
performance reporting and public accountability.
That's a huge field of work. So I'm just wondering if there's any parallels you see
coming in terms of what we're trying to do in terms of that overall legislation,
the work you're doing and
keeping the executive to account.
Well,
you're right. We've had good opportunities to
talk to a couple of the caucuses on the
performance reporting and public accountability work.
So hopefully, direct engagement with politicians
is helpful. We're definitely getting views expressed, so that's good.
That's good engagement.
And
Andrew, do you want to reflect on the work at the ports around organized
crime?
Yeah, I think that there's a couple of things in there.
First up, you asked about
how we tie in, I suppose, with
informing policy work and so on. We're not a policy agency ourselves, but the fact
that we look at issues, we identify problems in
performance and delivery,
governance and accountability, that's an input to future policy development by
government departments responsible for various functions.
When we look at things, just stepping away from that, if we look at things like
ports and activities at customs and
issues to do with organized crime,
every
year as part of our annual planning process, we do look at
areas of emergent risk across the state sector, public sector, so
not just Wellington and the government departments, but also
broader public sector.
And
we have been interested in seeing issues to do with transnational organized
crime. We're not a criminal investigation agency ourselves,
but if we can provide assurance around some of those main routes by which
contraband and so on may be coming into New Zealand and shed a
light on the performance of the border agencies in that space, then
we think that's a useful thing that we can be doing to
provide the public some assurance around how well our borders are protected.
So yeah, that's how that kind of works, Keven.
Thank you. Colleagues, we are scheduled to finish about 10 to.
Is anyone due in the house at 9:00?
Yeah.
Karina, and I'm just mindful that you might need to slip away, but we'll try and
finish in the next few minutes. We've got a couple of...
I have a question from Deb and Dr. David. Sorry, Barbara.
I'm just going to a question in your draft annual plan, just
that's left. You note around the
Ministry of Social Development Services Transformation program, that you'll
be involved as part of that program.
That looks like probably the largest government IT
project at a cost of $2 billion.
Because we don't cover this MSD as part of our scrutiny,
where are they up to in relation to that project?
Have they done an indicative business case or a business case that's been signed
off, funding has been secured? What particular stage are we up to?
Yeah. The
budget documents will, I guess, indicate the
level of funding that has been secured, but I believe they've
appointed their implementation partner.
That's the only thing I understand.
And so, this project has been-
Yes, it's a long one.
So I'm nervous to indicate a level of certainty
before I see the funding envelope that's been-
Okay. If I could just add-
NSD, their reporting on those significant levels spent
in terms of this program, it does filter in as part of the Treasury's
investment management reporting that comes to this committee. Mm-hmm.
So, that's being done quarterly, and so this committee
should expect to see regular updates in terms of where NSD's at.
But as I understand it, they're well through that Treasury
process in terms of things like gateway review, assurance around governance, and
those sorts of things. So Treasury is still the linkage point here for this
committee, so- Okay ... like to connect it. Thanks, Chair.
Quick fire, Dr. Davis.
Yeah, quick fire.
First of all, congratulations on the work you've done this year to try and catch up
and get all of that in place, especially with long-term plans.
That's significant.
Absolutely.
So thank you for that. Several of those long-term plan
organizations said that the constraints they have in that are
quite significant.
Is that true? And if so, why?
I think it is true, and if you
are a local government organization at the moment, given the level of
reform
that is in front of you,
on top of
probably an acknowledged under-investment in the infrastructure that drives your
ability to deliver key services, it's a pretty tough environment.
And your ability, particularly outside of the main metros, to
attract
high caliber talent is a real constraint.
If I think of the local plan audits I've
done over my time, the delta
between your engagement with Auckland or even a
Hamilton or a Wellington or a Christchurch and the rest is massive.
Yeah.
Unless they happen to have someone, a local who's chosen to stay
local and
every now and then you find a real
unicorn.
Grant, thank you to you and the team and the audit office.
Yeah.
Being a new role.
Officially launched.
Tomorrow.
We appreciate your engagement, and it's been really helpful to us and
for the coming year.
Thank you.
Well, we'll see you this afternoon.
Yeah.
Yes.
Thanks.